#dns

April 8, 2026

Having just wrapped up how network identities are built (IP Addressing) and handed out (DHCP), I am now moving into how they are actually found. I am dedicating this log to DNS.
Instead of forcing us to memorize IP addresses, DNS works invisibly in the background to resolve domain names to machine-readable numbers. Here is a deep dive into exactly how that
resolution process works.

DNS (Domain Name System): Responsible for resolving names to numbers. More specifically, Domain Names to IP Addresses. So if you type a website name into a search bar, DNS will
resolve that website name into a number, because all computers only speak in numbers. 

DNS operates on UDP Port 53 because it is quick. Since DNS is a single query and a single response, the 3-way handshake that occurs with TCP, would be wasting time and resources.
TCP is only used when it is larger packets that are being sent, typically the payload size is limited to 512 bytes for UDP, any larger is TCP. TCP may be used for whole zone transfers
of a domain in which it contains all the records for a domain and can't afford to lose any packets. Modern DNS may use EDNS0 for larger UDP packets but keeps TCP as a backup.

DNS isn't just a magical translation from names to addresses though, DNS takes steps:
  1. Browser/OS Cache: When you type google.com into a web browser, your web browser/OS are going to check in their cache memory to see if they have the IP address. Your OS will check 
if it has it anywhere its "Hosts" files or in its DNS cache. If it doesn't it goes to the next level.
  2. Recursive Resolver: If not found in the cache of the device it sends Recursive Query to the Resolver Server. The Resolver is usually provided by the ISP and does most of
the work when it comes to finding an IP address. The client is typically not strong enough to communicate with all the higher-level servers to be able to scour the internet for 
the IP of a website. The process that the Resolver uses to search for IPs is called "Recursion." 
  3. Root Server: The Resolver then performs an Iterative Query to one of the 13 Root Servers. The Root servers might not know where "google.com" but they know where the 
TLD (Top-Level Domain) Servers are.
  4. TLD Server: The Resolver will then go to the TLD Servers based off the extension of the domain (in this case it would be '.com'). So it would send it to the server that manages
all of the '.com' domains.
  5. Authoritative Name Server: This is the final destination and is the server that is actually owned by the company/domain host. It contains the A Record (IPv4 Address) for the 
domain and finally gives the Resolver the IP address.

The Resolver then stores the IP address that is received by the Authoritative Server, sends it to the original device making the query, and stores the IP in its cache memory in
case another query is made for that domain.

Records
  Identity Records (Address):
    A Record: Maps a domain name to an IPv4 Address (Example: google.com -> 142.250.190.46)
    AAAA Record: Maps domain name to an IPv6 Address (Example: google.com -> 2607:f8b0:4004:837::200e)
    CNAME (Canonical Name): Rather than pointing to an IP, it points from one domain to another domain (Example: www.google.com -> google.com) 
  Mail and Routing Records:
    MX Record (Mail Exchange): These are the mail servers responsible for receiving mail on behalf of the domain.
    NS Record (Name Server): These specify which DNS Servers are the Authoritative sources for a domain.
    Wildcard Record: Special type of DNS entry that can take any undefined subdomain to a specific destination. They use an asterisk (*) at the beginning of the domain.
  Security and Information Records: 
    TXT Record (Text): Allows admins to input human or machine-readable text into DNS.
    PTR Record (Pointer): Seen as the "Reverse DNS", it maps an IP address to a domain name.
    SRV Record (Service): Used to find the specific locations of services such as VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol), SIP (Session Initiation Protocol), or Windows Active Directory
    (Domain Controllers). This includes the port number and the priority.
    SOA Record (Start of Authority): Contains essential information such as the admin's email address, last time zone was updated, and how often a secondary server should
    refresh their data.

Primary vs Secondary Zone
  -Primary Zone: Only version of the zone that you can add, change, and delete records. It is the authoritative source of the data and is seen as the "Master" copy. This zone is
  stored as a local text file (the Zone file) in server's hard drive.
  -Secondary Zone: On a secondary zone/server you can not make any edits whatsoever, it is strictly read only. It gets information by copying the data from the primary zone, this
  is known as a Zone Transfer (uses Port 53). Its nmain job is load balance and redundancy. If Primary Zone crashes or goes offline, Secondary Zone can still answer DNS queries.

Zone Transfers
During zone transfers, Secondary DNS Servers pull a copy of the zone data from the Primary Server to make sure that they're synchronized
  -Incremental Zone Transfers (IXFR): This is considered the more efficient way to copy a zone, the secondary server requesting specifically what has been modified since 
    the last update.
  -Full Zone Transfer (AXFR): This is the secondary server requesting and receiving the entirety of the entire Zone File from the primary server. This is used for primarily the
    initial setup process or if the data is too unsynchronized for an incremental update.

Forward Lookup Zone: The most common type of DNS zone. It allows a DNS server to resolve a human-readable hostname into a machine-readable IP address. It contains records 
like A, AAAA, MX, and CNAME.

Split-Horizon DNS: A configuration where a DNS zone provides different responses based on the source of the query. Requests coming from the Internal Network resolve to a private IP, 
while requests from the Public Internet resolve to a public IP (or are blocked). This enhances security by hiding internal network infrastructure from the outside world.

Dynamic DNS (DDNS): This is a service that allows a device to update its own DNS record every time its IP address changes. If your router gets a new IP from the ISP (via DHCP), the
router will automatically send a message to a DDNS provider to let it know, in which the DDNS provider will then update your A record to match the new IP.

Caching vs Non-Caching Servers
  Caching (Recursive): Recursive Resolvers are considered "Caching" Servers because they eventually find an IP for the user and store it in its memory for the duration of the TTL.
  Non-Caching (Authoritative): These servers just hold onto the original Zone File that the IP is on.

Troubleshooting Commands:
  -nslookup (Name System Lookup): This command tells you which DNS server you are connected to and what IP address it found. You can use it to test specific servers to let you
  know whether the issue is the website or your ISP server (Example: nslookup google.com 8.8.8.8)
  -ipconfig /flushdns: This wipes the computer's DNS cache. You can use it if a website changed their IP but your computer is still trying to go to the old IP. This command
  will wipe the cache and force a new lookup.
  -dig (Domain Information Groper): Works in the same way as nslookup but provides more detail such as the TTL and flags set on the packet. 


DNSSEC- Extensions that add a digital signature to DNS records to ensure that data is authentic and untampered with. DNSSEC ensures that a hacker can not perform attacks such as 
DNS Cache Poisoning (where a hacker sends a fake IP to the Resolver) by allowing the Resolver to cryptographically verify that the data originated from an Authoritative Server.

DNS Tunneling- A method used by attackers to bypass firewalls by hiding non-DNS traffic inside DNS queries.

DoH (DNS over HTTPS)- A security protocol in which a DNS query is encrypted by hiding them inside HTTPS traffic. It uses the HTTPS Port 443 (this is what makes it look like
regular internet traffic and avoid being blocked by filters) rather than standard Port 53.

DoT (DNS over TLS)- A security protocol that work by wrapping DNS queries in a layer of TLS (Transport Layer Security). Has its own dedicated port, Port 853.

DNS Zone- This is a portion of the DNS namespace that is managed by an admin/entity. It is defined by a Zone File that contains all the resource records (A, MX, CNAME, etc.) 
for that domain.

CNAME Flattening- Allows a CNAME at the root of a domain when typically not allowed

FQDN (Fully Qualified Domain Name)- This is the complete address for a specific host on the internet. (Example: www.google.com) To be considered an FQDN it must have:
  -Host Name (Example: www)
  -Second-Level Domain (Example: google)
  -TLD (Example: com)
  -Root Zone (All FQDNs ends with .) (This is implied and hidden in most domains)

Hosts File- This is a plaintext file on an OS that maps hostnames to a specific IP address. This functioned as the "Legacy DNS" before the DNS we know today became a thing. 

Root Hints File- A file containing the IP addresses of the 13 Root Name Servers.

Stub Zone- Zone that only contains the necessary records to find the Authoritative Servers.

TTL (Time To Live)- This is a numerical value measured in seconds that's set by an admin to determine how long a Resolver or a Browser is allowed to cache an IP.

NXDOMAIN- Non-Existent Domain

RDATA (Resource Data)- This is the actual data that is being returned after the initial qquery was made. The format of the RDATA varies based on the record type. 
(Example: For an A record, the RDATA is an IPv4 address, while for an MX record, it includes both a priority number and a mail server hostname.)

Recursive vs Iterative Queries- 
  Recursive Query: Client demands a final answer from the Resolver (Example: Either give me an IP or notify me that it doesn't exist)
  Iterative Query: Rather than scouting the internet or giving a final answer, the server will (if it doesn't know the answer) point to a server that may know the answer
  (Root Server or TLD Server)
